Add Best Practice: Always declare attributes on consumable/resolvable configurations (#36361)
gradle/gradle: platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/reference/best-practices/best_practices_dependencies.adoc

=== Tags

`<<tags_reference.adoc#tag:dependencies,#dependencies>>`

[[use_attributes_on_configurations]]
== Always Declare Attributes on Consumable and Resolvable Configurations

When creating custom configurations that are meant to be consumed or resolved, always declare at least one <<variant_attributes.adoc#variant-attributes,attribute>> on them.

=== Explanation

> Gradle uses <<variant_aware_resolution.adoc#sec:understanding-variant-selection,variant-aware dependency resolution>> to select the correct artifacts when resolving dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gradle uses <<variant_aware_resolution.adoc#sec:understanding-variant-selection,variant-aware dependency resolution>> to select the appropriate artifacts.
```

Attributes are the primary mechanism for matching resolvable configurations to consumable configurations (variants).

Even if there is only a single consumable configuration in a producer project, if that configuration lacks attributes, resolving it using variant-aware dependency resolution is not possible and will result in the following error:

[source,text]
----
Unable to find a matching variant of project :producer:
  - No variants exist.
----

> Gradle is able to resolve configurations without using attributes, by selecting configurations by name directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While Gradle can resolve configurations by selecting them directly by name, this approach is outdated:
```

This is now only recommended when using Ivy repositories, and <<upgrading_version_8.adoc#selecting_variant_by_configuration_name,was deprecated for Maven repositories>> in Gradle 8.10 and removed in Gradle 9.0.0.
This mechanism can still be used for local project dependencies, but should be avoided.

> The name of a configuration should be considered an implementation detail that shouldn't leave the bounds of a project, and should not be relied upon for dependency resolution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Configuration names should be treated as internal implementation details. Relying on them for resolution forces the consumer to know too much about the producer's internal structure.
```

When adding attributes to a configuration, common attributes to use include:

* `Category.CATEGORY_ATTRIBUTE` - Indicates the category of the component (e.g., `LIBRARY`, `DOCUMENTATION`)

> And for JVM projects, also:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * `Usage.USAGE_ATTRIBUTE` - Indicates how the dependency is used (e.g., `JAVA_RUNTIME`, `JAVA_API`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For JVM Projects:
** `Usage.USAGE_ATTRIBUTE` - Indicates how the dependency is used (e.g., `JAVA_RUNTIME`, `JAVA_API`)
```

> * `LibraryElements.LIBRARY_ELEMENTS_ATTRIBUTE` - Indicates the type of library elements (e.g., `JAR`, `CLASSES`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** `LibraryElements.LIBRARY_ELEMENTS_ATTRIBUTE` - Indicates the type of library elements (e.g., `JAR`, `CLASSES`)
```
